# The Elif Statement

## What is it?

We have now learned how to make decisions in our program based on whether something is true or false. Each if-else combination is essentially two options for one condition, but what if we want to have multiple options based on a condition? What if we want to check for multiple conditions?

This is when we use an elif statement. The keyword elif is a combination of the else statement and the if statement. It allows us to add more conditions to check for before the else statement is run.

### Syntax

    #Keyword elif statement starts the condition

    elif condition is true:

    #We then check for a condition and ends it with a colon

        #If the condition is true, then the code underneath is run

        run this code

    #If the first condition is true, then the elif statements are skipped

    if condition is true:
        do this

    #If the first condition is false, then the elif statements are checked

    elif condition2 is true:
        do this

    #If the first elif condition was false, the next elif condition is checked

    elif condition3 is true:
        do this

    #If none of the if/elif conditions are true, then the code under the else statement is run

    else:
        do this

The elif statement allows us to check multiple conditions in a sequence starting from the if statement and will then go down each elif statement one by one, the first condition that is true is the one that is run.

REMEMBER: only the if statement OR one of the elif statements OR the else statement will run. It is NOT possible for two of them to run for the same input.

## Example

We are going to go back to our number example from the past two lessons and add an elif statement

    print("Welcome to the program")

    x = 11

    if x > 10:

        print("Bigger than 10")

    #Check for a new compound condition

    #Use elif keyword
    elif x > 5 and x <= 10: #Pass in a condition that checks if a number is between 5 and 10

        print("Between 5 and 10")

    else:

        print("Less than 10")

    print("Goodbye")

If we change x to 6, then we will see our elif statement run

    x = 6

The output will be:

    Welcome to the program
    Between 5 and 10
    Goodbye

This is because 6 is less than 10, so the if statement did not run, but the elif checks if x is between 5 and 10, which 6 is. Then the print statement under the elif statement is run. Since, only one (if/elif/else) can run, the else statement does not run.
